---
layout: post
title:  "Scala"
date:   2015-05-15
tags: [Scala, Functional Programming]
---

When I was studying at university. I worked with excellent professors and one of them named Guillermo Levine recently sent us an e-mail with information about a presentation of one of his partners named Américo Vargas Villazón.
The contained slides show about Scala programming language and today I share this information with you.

## Scala: A mixed scalable language
* Introduction: trends in the evolution of programming languages.
* Scala as object-oriented language
* Scala as a functional language
* Some consequences of the combination of paradigms for software development
* Tools to support software development in Scala
* Educational material recommended for learning the language

### Introduction
Scala has been present into the academic environment since a long time. Recently into the software industry due to influence of progresses into the academic environment, but who is behind this new trend?

Some trends with enough time in the software industry are:

* Object-oriented languages with strong "ecosystem" (APIs for all types of functionality): Java, C#
* Compilers generating code for VMs with services that replace the operating system or act as intermediaries with regards to them (JVM, CLR)
* Generic types.- Incorporated into the above languages at some point in their evolution.
* Object-oriented design patterns (“Gang of four” and others after).- In order to increase the reusability promoting composition instead of inheritance.

Some trends into the academic environment are:

* Languages based on the paradigm of functional programming: immutability of values, functions as values.
* Functions in the mathematical sense, that is pure, no “side effect”.
* Referential transparency: and expression can be replaced at any time by value (base of the computational model of substitution)
* Strong type inference (i.e. strict and static): every variable has a type and this is inferred/verified during compilation time.
* Powerful systems types (Types “generic” of object-oriented languages are just the beginning…)
* Powerful forms of composition using functions.

Some trends into the software industry due to progresses into the academic environment:

* Languages that combine object-oriented paradigm with the functional paradigm: functional languages “impure”.
* In the Microsoft world: F# (including the same C#, the official language of the .Net platform, although less so)
* In the Java world: Scala
* Others: Ocaml, etc.

Who is behind this new trend?

* The search for a more expressive language and more “type-safe”, but more particularly suitable as a tool for thinking about the solutions to problems (in this last sense the object-oriented paradigm has proved not to be the panacea)
* In short, we seek to give another (big) step forward in solving the very old `“software crisis”`: software development has great science behind, but not (yet) engineering.

###Scala as object-oriented language

The next points show the characteristics of Scala as object-oriented language:

* More modern syntax (and “something else”)
  * More concise.
  * Less ceremonious.
  * Constructions such as operator overloading, methods such as infix operators, arguments are not enclosed in parenthesis, arguments in braces … They make it ideal for developing Embedded Domain-Specific Languages (EDSLs) with a “natural” syntax.
  * At the first instance less boilerplate.
  * Furthermore, the whole ceremony Java type declaration is not necessary: the types can infer the compiler (with some restrictions more than reasonable)
  * Caveat: To better "thinking" and document a program is always advisable to declare at least the most important types.
  * Consequences are plain to see:
    * The same functionality is accomplished typically in a third or even a quarter of the lines of code that demands Java.
    * A Scala program may look like a “script” in a dynamic language, but without time bombs related to not verified types.
    * Very expressive extensions for the language that seem form part of its native syntax, although in reality are EDSLs.

Class declaration using Java
{% highlight Java %}
public class Person {
  private String name;
  private int age;
  public Person(String name, int age) {
    this.name = name;
    this.age = age;
  }
  public String getName() {
    return name;
  }
  public String getAge() {
    return age;
  }
  public String setName(String name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
  public String setAge(int age) {
    this.age = age;
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Class declaration using Scala
      
{% highlight Scala %}
class Person(var name: String, var age: Int)
{% endhighlight %}

Overloading of operators using Scala

{% highlight Scala %}
var notebook = Map("Juan" -> "123", "Tatiana" -> "456")

notebook += ("Americo" -> "777")

println("Americo -> " + notebook("Americo"))
{% endhighlight %}

“Script” in Scala
{% highlight Scala %}
// A typical "script" in Scala

import java.io.File

object PrintFilesUsingScala {
  
  def main(args: Array[String]) = {
    val directory = args(0)
    println("Files .scala into the directory '" + directory + "':")
    val files = (new File(directory)).listFiles
    for {
      file <- files
      if file.isFile()
      if file.getName.endsWith(".scala")
    } println(file)
  }
}

{% endhighlight %}

* Compatibility with the semantics of Java incorporating improvements.
  * The Java compiler generates .class files
    * Full interoperability with Java (All the “ecosystem” of Java at the disposal of programmer Scala)
    * Performance comparable to Java.
  * Compatibility with the semantics of Java incorporating improvements.
    * Scala is a pure object-oriented language.
    * All values are objects (no distinctions between primitive types and reference types as Java does): Smalltalk approach, but with strong types.
    * There are not members (fields/methods) static. Instead it is defined a “companion object” (module) with the same name of a class who has access to its private members.
  * "Traits", also known as "mixins"
    * They allow you to add functionality to a class which is transverse / orthogonal to its "direct hereditary lineage".
    * This functionality can be as varied as needed (a class can inherit multiple traits).
    * In Java something similar is done implementing interfaces, but the complete code corresponding to the abstract interface functions must be added to each of the classes that implement.
    * In Scala, however the `traits` are like interfaces that besides the statements of abstract functions can contain concrete functions (with code)
    * The class that incorporates a `feature` must implement only their abstract functions.
    * Other functions may be implemented in the same `trait` in terms of abstract functions: the corresponding code is "inherited" (no need to repeat it in every class that incorporates the `trait`)
    * It is even possible to use in the specific functions of the trait functions of the class that inherits ("self types"), which is checked by the compiler when a class that inherits the trait is declared.
    * If a class inherits from several other classes and traits, the compiler linearizes the collection of "ancestors" (solution to the classic "diamond problem")
  * Concordance with patterns ("pattern matching")
    * Allows case analysis based on structural variants of a given class (the so-called "case classes", which implicitly define constructors that later can be used as patterns)
    * The concordance with the pattern (constructor) destroys or "disarms" structure, whose components (constructor arguments) are ready to be processed.
    * Focusing popularized by functional languages with algebraic types (ML, Haskell, ...)
  * And much more:
    * XML native with incorporated "parsers" and "printers" and XPath style queries.
    * "Generic" types better than Java and a powerful library collections based on them.
    * "Structural typing" or "duck typing" (if you do it can do a duck, then is a duck), such as Ruby, but with static verification.
    * Powerful advanced system types: existencial types, abstract types as members, bounded types, etcetera ... (Still, the true power of Scala type system is best appreciated in the context of functional programming)
    

Example: mixins and selftypes

{% highlight Scala %}
trait rasgo {
  this: { def retoca(n:Int): Int } =>
  def calcula_A(arg: Int): Int
  def calcula_B(arg: Int): Int
  private def combina(a: Int, b:Int) = a + b
  def combina_A_y_B_con_retoque(arg: Int) = {
    val a = calcula_A(arg)
    val b = calcula_B(arg)
    retoca(combina(a, b))
  }
}

trait retocador {
  def retoca(n: Int) = n * n
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Scala %}
class clase extends rasgo with retocador {
  def calcula_A(arg: Int) = arg + 1
  def calcula_B(arg: Int) = arg – 3
}

(new clase).combina_A_y_B_con_retoque(7) // ~> 144

/*
error: self-type clase does not conform to rasgo's selftype ...

  class clase extends rasgo {
    def calcula_A(arg: Int) = arg + 1
    def calcula_B(arg: Int) = arg – 3
  }
*/
{% endhighlight %}

Example: case classes and pattern matching

{% highlight Scala %}
// An easy application (and typical) of case classes:
// evaluator of AST of certains arithmetic expressions

class ArithExpr {
  def eval() : Double = {
    this match {
      case Const(c) => c
      case BinOp(op, e1, e2) =>
        op match {
          case "+" => e1.eval() + e2.eval()
          case "*" => e1.eval() * e2.eval()
        }
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Scala %}
case class Const (c: Double) extends ArithExpr

case class BinOp (op: String, e1: ArithExpr, e2: ArithExpr)extends ArithExpr

object ArithExpr {
  def main(args : Array[String]) = {
    val e = BinOp ("*", Const(3.0), BinOp("+", Const(2), Const(1.0)))
    println(e + ".eval() = " + e.eval()) // ~> 9
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}


* Consequences of great importance to software engineering
  * Programs more concise, more expressive, more readable.
  * Therefore: more reliable, more easily modifiable, more easily maintainable (the desirable features in programs to solve the "software crisis")
  * The features are a new approach, more powerful and flexible, to the composition of modules that:
    * solves the same problems as multiple inheritance,
    * without falling into complications
  * The advanced system types put into programmer hands a powerful tool of abstraction.
  * Scala was from the beginning, according to many experts, `Java's future` has since the days of Java 1.6 all the proposed for future versions of Java (7, 8 or who knows ...) and much more.
  * But that is not all ...

### Scala as functional language
* Everything you expect in a modern functional language.
  * Functions are values, they have all the rights of "first class citizens" can be stored in structures, be received as arguments or be returned as values by other functions ...
  * The "higher order functions" are precisely those that receive or return other functions. They constitute a highly expressive means of combining functions. Allow to generalize the ways to tour / processing certain structures as well as define special control structures and advanced "patterns of composition".
  * Lambda expressions (anonymous functions)
  * Curried functions (which can be partially applied to their arguments)
  * Partial functions (defined on only part of their domain)
  * Parametric polymorphism (called generic types in OO languages, to another level ...)
  * Automatic type inference and verification against the declared types.
  * "Exotic" types for advanced applications: of superior rank, generalized algebraic (GADTs) ... until it is possible to compute with the types (the type system turns out to be, like language, "Turing complete")

Example of superior order functions: Detect if the string "nombre" has some uppercase character.
`using Java`

{% highlight Java %}
// Java:

boolean nombreTieneMayuscula = false;
for (int i = 0; i < nombre.length(); ++i) {
  if (Character.isUpperCase(nombre.charAt(i))) {
    nombreTieneMayuscula = true;
    break;
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

`using Scala`
{% highlight Scala %}
// Scala:

val nombreTieneMayuscula = nombre.exists(_.isUpperCase)

// where
// nombre.exists(_.isUpperCase) 

// it's similar to
// nombre.exists(c => c.isUpperCase)

{% endhighlight %}


Example of high order functions: special control structure

{% highlight Scala %}
// --------------------------------------------------------
// A special control structure:
// Execute certain code with a writer file
// and does not forget close the file when finish.
// --------------------------------------------------------

// Here we have the function:

import java.io._

def ejecuta_y_cierra(nombreArchivo: String)(codigo : PrintWriter => Unit) = {
  val archivoEscritura = new PrintWriter(new File(nombreArchivo))
  try { codigo(archivoEscritura) } finally { archivoEscritura.close() }
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight Scala %}
// Now an example about how to use it

ejecuta_y_cierra("salida.txt") {
  salida => salida write "Saludos desde Scala" 
}

// where
// salida write "Saludos desde Scala"

// similar to
// salida.write("Saludos desde Scala")
{% endhighlight %}

* With some peculiarities and additional facilities.
  * Call by default (strict language), but also a call by name.
  * implicit arguments and nominal arguments.
  * Collections with lazy evaluation of its elements (Example: streams, the equivalent of the "lazy lists" of Haskell)
  * Types and implicit arguments (very useful, allowing implement "rich types" and more ...)
  * Type classes (ad-hoc polymorphism or non-parametric Haskell) can be implemented using implicit arguments and traits.
  * Monads exist through syntax understandings. Of course, its application to structure functional programs is relevant not to isolate the "unclean" parts of a program as in Haskell (Scala is an impure language)
  * Extractors: Define views on types who hide their internal structure (solution to the old problem of the conflict between information hiding and pattern matching, both very desirable)
  * Actors: concurrent programming message-based (as opposed to based on shared memory) to Erlang style (an example of EDSL)
  * Great "market opportunity" for functional programming now that all processors are "multi-core".
  * Goodbye to the nightmare of ensuring "thread safety" and avoid "deadlock" techniques using mutex.



Example: "for" nested insights

{% highlight Scala %}
// Comprensiones for anidadas
// cualquier parecido con SQL o LINQ es pura casualidad

case class Invitado (nombre: String, nacionalidad: String, lenguas: List[String])

object InvitadosQH {

  def main(args : Array[String]) = {

    val invitados = List(
      Invitado("Juan", "Boliviana", List("Castellano", "Quechua", "Aymara")),
      Invitado("Jorge", "Peruana", List("Castellano", "Quechua", "Aymara")),
      Invitado("Pedro", "Boliviana", List("Castellano", "Quechua", "Italiano")),
      Invitado("Liliana", "Boliviana", List("Castellano")),
      Invitado("Estela", "Boliviana", List("Castellano"))
    )

println("Invitados bolivianos Quechua hablantes:")

    for {
      i <- invitados
      if i.nacionalidad == "Boliviana"
      l <- i.lenguas
      if l == "Quechua"
    } println (i.nombre) // ~> Juan, Pedro

  }

}

{% endhighlight %}



### Some consequences of the combination of paradigms.

* The central purpose, which gives its name to the language, is scalability: one language can serve both to write simple "scripts" to develop large software systems.
* The complex patterns of design object-oriented programming are replaced by simple functional diagrams.
* The combination of paradigms allows better modularize the programs, `Type-safety` and better possibilities for reuse.
* Big facilities for the development of incorporated languages of specific domain based on combinators (a term commonly used to describe higher-order functions that overload operators)
* Examples: Actors, "parser combinators", etc ...
* Suitable "wrappers" for conventional Java APIs that leverage greater expressiveness of Scala.
* Example: Hibernate for ORM.
* Isolate the pure parts of a program of impure parts requires a self-imposed discipline, it is not guaranteed by the language as in the case of Haskell.
* The external facade may be from a class with immutable objects and mutability (if appropriate / necessary) will be encapsulated.
* In the context of what has been said and tools listed below, Scala is, in my opinion, the ideal programming language to implement the so-called `"agile" development` or `"extreme"`.
* Are we talking about a conceptually new solution to the software crisis?
* Remember the ideal of structured design:
  * High cohesion: by definition, functional cohesion.
  * Low coupling: how about functions without side effects? (the only way for coupling / communication is the functional composition)
* From another perspective: computation by state (imperative) vs computation by value (functional)
  * The computation by state is intrinsically complex (no simple semantics and enough practice is able to capture its essence)
  * The computation by value has a semantic (denotational, which comes directly from the lambda calculus) really simple and powerful...
  * AND a logic, the equational, equally powerful based on the simple principle of replacing the same by the same.
  * In a few words: it is easier to reason about functional programs (eg to prove their properties.) Rather than on imperative programs.
  * In addition, it results that the "imperative languages" reflect better how it works a machine to mechanically solve a problem that the way humans think to find a solution.
  * This was observed by McCarthy, the inventor of Lisp, more than 60 years.
  * And further (about 40 years ago) Backus when he announces liberation from "von Neumann style".
  
### Tools to support software development

* Interpreter (also serves to Java APIs ...) and compiler (very advanced)
* IDEs: Eclipse, IDEA
* Development of languages: parser combinators, string templates, delimited continuations compiler, compile-time metaprogramming...
* Test: ScalaCheck, randomly generated test values (inspired by QuickCheck for Haskell)
* Specification: Specs, EDSL with a natural syntax to write executable specifications through verifiable tests.
* Open the "big door" to the test-driven development (TDD) and test-driven behavior (BDD)

Example: Specification using `Specs`.

{% highlight Scala %}
class CalculatePriceServiceSpecification
  extends Specification with TestPricingSystem {
    "Calculate price service" should {
      "calculate price for cost plus price type" in {
        val service = new CalculatePriceService
        val price: Double = service.calculate("costPlus", "some product")
        price must beEqualTo(5.0D)
    }
    "calculate price for external price source type" in {
      val service = new CalculatePriceService
      val price: Double = service.calculate("externalPriceSource“,b"some product“)
      price must beEqualTo (10.0D)
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

* Web frameworks: Lift, Play
* ORMs: JPA, Squeryl, others.
* Concurrent programming: Akka (actors, software transactional memory, agents, data flows) replaces as the standard to EDSL Actors.
* Administrative tools: version control (Mercurial, Git) and incidents (JIRA supports Scrum agile process).
* etc.


### Recommended educational material to learn the language.

* Series of articles
  * Neward. “The busy Java developer´s guide to Scala: Functional programming for the object-oriented”, in www.ibm.com/developerworks
  * Spiewak. “Scala for Java refugees”, en www.codecommit.com
  * More references into the official site of Scala, www.scala-lang.org
* Books
  * Subramaniam. [“Programming Scala”][4]. Good introduction with “Scala style”, concise and accessible.
  * Odersky, Spoon, Venners. ["Programming in Scala", Second Edition][1]. The "bible". Great tutorial, it helps like a reference. Good book and furthermore over the fundamental concepst of programming, independent of the language.
  * Horstmann. [“Scala for the impatient”][2]. Very good as a reference.
  * Raychaudhuri. [“Scala  in Action”][3].  Small practical projects for people who had started with the language.  
* Online courses
  * Coursera. “Functional Programming Principles in Scala”
  * Coursera. “Principles of Reactive Programming”
  * Both by  Martin Odersky,  creator of Scala, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Laussane. The second with contributions from recognized authorities in the field of concurrent programming.



[1]: http://amzn.to/1dkJ7vm
[2]: http://amzn.to/1ILLaVY
[3]: http://amzn.to/1FBt48E
[4]: http://amzn.to/1AmgasQ
